Add documentation for services with response data (#1797)
home-assistant/developers.home-assistant: docs/dev_101_services.md

async def custom_set_sleep_timer(entity, service_call):
    await entity.set_sleep_timer(service_call.data['sleep_time'])
```

## Response Data

Services may optionally respond to a service call with data for powering more advanced automations. The use of response data for services is meant for

> cases not a fit for the Home Assistant state e.g. a response stream of repeated objects, or API would be better queried on demand or filtered such as a search.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cases that do not fit the Home Assistant state. For example, a response stream of repeated objects, or API would be better queried on demand or filtered such as a search.
```
I don't quite understand this sentence. What's the link between Home Assistant state and querying or filtering?

Author: Here is what i'm kind of trying to say: People try to stick stuff in a normal entity, but its like way too complicated or changes a lot. Say you have a schedule of all upcoming events -- that is too much data to put into a sensor attribute. Usually sensors just have a single value or some small number of attributes.  That data may be a good fit for a service response data.

Conversely, don't use service response data when you should use an entity.

The "filtered" part is not worded well. Let me take that out.

Reviewer: not sure I can follow just yet. 
basically, what you are saying: if you want to transmit a large amount of data, such as a response stream of objects or an API, stick it into the response data, not into some other attribute?
If so, then I still don't understand how the querying, filtering, and search comes in.

        """Search in the date range and return the matching items."""
        if not call.return_response:
            raise ValueError("Request did not ask for response data")
        items = await my_client.search(call.data["start"], call.data["end"])
        return {
            "items": [
                {
                    "summary": item["summary"],
                    "description": item["description"],
                } for item in items
            ],
        }

      hass.services.async_register(
          DOMAIN,
          SEARCH_ITEMS_SERVICE_NAME,
          search_items,
          schema=SEARCH_ITEMS_SCHEMA,
          supports_response=True,
      )
```

There are some additional implementation standards:

- You must set `supports_response` when registering a service so that the core
knows which services support response data.
- All response data should be serializable in json `JsonObjectType`. This is so that it can interoperate with other parts of the system such as the frontend.
- You may conditionally check the `ServiceCall` property `return_response` to
decide whether or not response data should be returned (e.g. if it is large or

> expensive to fetch). When not set, the service may return `None`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
expensive to fetch). When not set, the service may return `None`.
```

> - Errors must be raised as exceptions such as `HomeAssistantError`. The response data is not allowed to contain error codes or statuses to error handling mistakes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Errors must be raised as exceptions, such as `HomeAssistantError`. The response data is not allowed to contain error codes or statuses to error handling mistakes.
```
I don't quite understand the last sentence here. Does it mean "The response data is not allowed to contain error codes or statuses which are used for error handling" ?

Author: Yes.

> - Response data should not be used for when there is a simpler alternative allowed by the state or entity model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Response data should not be used if there is a simpler alternative provided by the state or entity model.
```

async def custom_set_sleep_timer(entity, service_call):
    await entity.set_sleep_timer(service_call.data['sleep_time'])
```

## Response Data

Services may optionally respond to a service call with data for powering more advanced automations. The use of response data for services is meant for

> cases that do not fit the Home Assistant state. For example, a response stream of repeated objects, or API would be better queried on demand or filtered such as a search.

Reviewer 2: This could use some more concrete usage examples. What I was wondering is whether it would be fine to use this for "raw  command" service calls to allow users act on devices in ways that are not yet-if-ever supported by the integration?

Example code:

```python
import datetime
import voluptuous as vol
from homeassistant.config_entries import ConfigEntry
from homeassistant.core import HomeAssistant, ServiceCall, ServiceResponse
from homeassistant.helpers import config_validation as cv, entity_platform, service

SEARCH_ITEMS_SERVICE_NAME = "search_items"
SEARCH_ITEMS_SCHEMA = vol.Schema({
    vol.Required("start"): datetime.datetime,
    vol.Required("end"): datetime.datetime,
})

async def async_setup_entry(hass: HomeAssistant, entry: ConfigEntry) -> bool:
    """Set up the platform."""

    async def search_items(call: ServiceCall) -> ServiceResponse:
        """Search in the date range and return the matching items."""
        if not call.return_response:

>             raise ValueError("Request did not ask for response data")

Reviewer 3: This is now handled by HA, right?

        items = await my_client.search(call.data["start"], call.data["end"])
        return {
            "items": [
                {
                    "summary": item["summary"],
                    "description": item["description"],
                } for item in items
            ],
        }

      hass.services.async_register(
          DOMAIN,
          SEARCH_ITEMS_SERVICE_NAME,
          search_items,
          schema=SEARCH_ITEMS_SCHEMA,
          supports_response=True,
      )
```

> There are some additional implementation standards:

Reviewer 2: I would move this before the code sample, and separate the must haves from optional items. This way the reader has already a context when they skim over the code example, and they know which parts they are required to implement.

Author: I restructured this based on your feedback.

- You must set `supports_response` when registering a service so that the core
knows which services support response data.

> - All response data should be serializable in json `JsonObjectType`. This is so that it can interoperate with other parts of the system such as the frontend.

Reviewer 4: Mention that the response data type must be a dict?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- All response data should be serializable in JSON `JsonObjectType`. This is so that it can interoperate with other parts of the system, such as the frontend.
```

Reviewer 2: Maybe add a link to the `JsonObjectType`? If it's important enough to mention, the reader should be able to find more information about what that is.

I would write the "must haves" in imperative mood, maybe as a bullet-point list  with the tone something like this:
> If service returns a response, it must set `supports_response` (to what? True?) during registration.
> The response data must be serializable to JSON (see `JsonObjectType`).
> Errors must be raised as exceptions and not as return values.

And separate the parts that are optional into their own paragraph.
For implementation hints, it's better to use those "hint", "warning", "notice" type of boxes, but how they are called in the docs eludes me currently, sorry :-(

- You may conditionally check the `ServiceCall` property `return_response` to
decide whether or not response data should be returned (e.g. if it is large or
expensive to fetch). When not set, the service may return `None`.

> - Errors must be raised as exceptions, such as `HomeAssistantError`. The response data is not allowed to contain error codes or statuses which are used for error handling. We want to keep error handling simple to avoid error handling mistakes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Errors must be raised as exceptions, such as `HomeAssistantError`. The response data is not allowed to contain error codes or statuses which are used for error handling.
```
Are other exception types allowed? If not, `errors must be raised as "homeassistanterrors"` would be much clearer.

I'm wondering if the second sentence means that a service call like `raw_command` (just a hypothetical one, allowing sending a raw request to the device) would not be allowed to return the device response to the user? If yes, that's unfortunate as I have seen such uses as a temporary fix until some features get implemented...

Author: I reworded this to try to make the intent more clear.

I don't want to specify all error handling best practices here, or establish new standards here, but just say we want the existing standards to apply here too. There is some discussion of this on https://developers.home-assistant.io/docs/integration_quality_scale_index but there are a couple cases that need further consistency / improvements.

For the raw command case: I don't have a strong opinion here, but it seems to be trying to solve something other than returning data for automations. Anyway, I've clarified the intent about not pushing complex error handling on to users as the main goal.

> - Errors must be raised as exceptions, such as `HomeAssistantError` and the response data is not allowed to contain error codes or statuses which are used for error handling. We want to keep error handling simple to avoid error handling mistakes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Errors must be raised as exceptions, such as `HomeAssistantError`. The response data is not allowed to contain error codes or statuses which are used for error handling. We want to keep error handling simple to avoid error handling mistakes.
```

> - Response data should not be used if there is a simpler alternative provided by the state or entity model.

Reviewer 2: Remove this, or at least link and/or describe the simpler approaches.

Author: Thanks, I've clarified this. Basically i'm trying to say something like: don't use this for a temperature sensor when you should use a temperature sensor.

        return {
            "items": [
                {
                    "summary": item["summary"],
                    "description": item["description"],
                } for item in items
            ],
        }

      hass.services.async_register(
          DOMAIN,
          SEARCH_ITEMS_SERVICE_NAME,
          search_items,
          schema=SEARCH_ITEMS_SCHEMA,
          SupportsResponse.ONLY,
      )
```

The use of response data is meant for cases that do not fit the Home Assistant state. For example, a response stream of objects. Conversely, response data should not be used for cases that are a fit for entity state. For example, a temperature value should just be a sensor.

### Supporting Response Data

Service calls are registered with a `SupportsResponse` value to indicate response data is supported.

| Value      | Description                                  |
| ---------- | -------------------------------------------- |
| `OPTIONAL` | The service performs and action and can optionally return response data. The service should conditionally check the `ServiceCall` property `return_response` to decide whether or not response data should be returned, or `None`. |

> | `ONLY` | The service is read only and always returns response data. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `ONLY` | The service doesn't perform any actions and always returns response data. |
```
Unless "read-only" has another meaning, I would stick with the same wording that was used for the previous option. This pattern is called _parallelism_. It should improve readability.
